a lot of the time, it's just a bunch of algorithms that are trained to do the same thing over and over again. And that's why I think this is going to be a fun talk and a promising talk, and I'm going to promise you at the beginning what my conclusions will be. And then we'll come back to them at the end and see if I've kept that promise. So the most important point I want to get across is that while you hear about machine learning all the time — and I mean, you've heard about it a million times — it just isn't that simple. It's a lot more complicated than you think it is. And I think that the best way to get a handle on it is to have a group of people who are experts in machine learning, and we're going to use that group as a model, and then we can use that model to train our own machine learning models.

logic, statistics, and statistics and logic, and you can actually build AI programs that incorporate all of these different types of power sources that can drive an artificial intelligence, and they really come from different places, one effectively from statistics and one from logic. The second point is that each of them have pluses and minuses. They each have strengths and weaknesses. And you don't have to choose between them. You can really build AI program that incorporate logical reasoning, logic, statistical reasoning, and logic. And each of these power sources can drive artificial intelligence. And they really can. The first point is, there really are two possible power sources — one effective from statistics, one from reasoning. And the second is, each of those power sources have a plus and a minus. Each of them has strengths and weakness. They all have strengths, and each has a weakness. You actually can build AI that incorporate each of the two power sources.

hemispheres do. And we'll see if I keep my promise by the end of the talk. So when I talk about there being two different power sources, you can think of them almost like the two hemisspheres of your brain, where your right brain hemisphere does a kind of pattern formation, very much like what neural nets do, very very like what machine learning do. So all that and a couple demos and more. And let me tell you a little bit about what I'm going to talk about. I'll talk about two different sources of power. And you can imagine that when you talk about the two different source of power, you'll think of it almost like your brain's right brain and your left brain, and you're going to think of the two right brains and the left brain and the right brain. So you can just think of these two brains as two different brains, and then you can talk about these two different types of power sources.

1. **Overview:** - What does learning do, where you get the equivalent of patterns built up and used when you encounter new data, sort of like when Amazon or Netflix makes recommendations about products or movies for you, using multilayer neural nets trained on big data. And when I talk about left brain thinking, I'm talking more about like what the Sherlock Holmes character does, metaphorically puffing on his Mierscham . 2. **Disambiguation:** The left brain is the part of the brain that is responsible for logical reasoning. 3. **Mierscham is a brand of whisky. 4. **Left brain thinking is the opposite of right brain thinking. It's the part that's responsible for logic reasoning. And it's a kind of like Sherlock Holmes, he's metaphorically smoking a Miersham . 5. **Difference:** When you talk about the left brain, you're talking about what the right brain does, like what Sherlock Holmes the character does.

If you own a shirt, you probably own the buttons of that shirt. Since you own that shirt, I'm going to assume that you own the left front tire of that car and so on. So if you're a lawyer, you'll need to be able to use logic and reasoning to come up with logical arguments that prove your point. So you need to have a good understanding of the law and how the law works. So the first step is to understand that the law is a set of rules that govern how a person can and can't own something. And the second step is how you can use the law to prove that something is yours. So, the third step is, how do you know that you have the right to own something? And the fourth step is what do you do about it? And then the fifth step is when do you get to the point where you've got a legal argument that proves your point?

linguistic skills that will serve us in good stead for the rest of our lives, it's a layer of common sense that we've already developed by about the time that we get really linguistic abilities, we'll have already developed this layer that will service us in a very good way for a long time to come. And that's not linguistic skills. It's common sense reasoning that we typically have formed by around the time we reach age three or four. And there are actually tens of millions of those rules of common-sense reasoning that you typically have forming before about the age that we reach a level of linguistic ability. So about the level that we are able to linguistically communicate, we have already formed this layer of a common sense layer that we can use to communicate with people around the world. And we're going to talk about that in the next part of the lesson. So let's start with a rule of thumb. Let's say that you're walking down the street and you see a sign that says that you can't cross a street. And you look at the sign and you say, oh, no, I'm going to cross the street, and I'll see if I can cross that street.

In this lesson, we're going to talk about how AI programs can get good value out of both left brain and right brain thinking. So let's start with the left brain hemisphere. The left brain has a lot of information, so it's a good place to start. The right brain, on the other hand, doesn't have as much information. So, the right brain AIs have a kind of brittleness in their right brains. Now, let me give you an example of this. Let's say you're a computer programmer. You're working on an AI program. The AI program is going to do a number of tasks. The first task is to find a way to solve a problem. The second task is, how do you solve this problem? The third task is: How do you do this? The fourth task is the hardest one. The fifth task is a little bit easier. The sixth task is one of the most difficult ones. And the seventh is the one that's the most interesting. The eighth is the last task. The tenth is the most challenging one. And finally, the twelfth task is what's called the 'right brain AI'. The last task is called 'left brain AI.'

Amazon's customers about books, and that kind of right brain brittleness is there every time we talk to a friend about books that they've recently lost a child, because that's one of the main themes of that second book, and it's a book about a recent loss of a baby, and one of those main themes is that the second book is about how to deal with grief, and I could give you examples of that, like yes, a program like Amazon 's might recommend because you liked one of these books, you might like the other, whereas your friend who knows that you recently lost, he might go out of his way to not recommend that book to you. That kind of 'right brain' britttleness, I could tell you, is there in every interaction that we have with people, whether they're friends, family members, strangers, or people who are strangers to us.

Brittleness is there every time we use a search engine like Google. In this case, we're asking who was the prime minister of the United Kingdom when the current prime minister was born? If you ask that, you'll get a million hits that tell you when Theresa May was born, none of which mention the actual answer, which is Anthony brittleness was born in the United States and he's now a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, where he teaches a course on human-machine interfaces, and we'll talk about that in a moment. So that's the first time I'm going to talk about this. So let's go back to the question that we asked. Let's say you're looking for the birth date of the current British prime minister, and you type in the name of the person you want to search for, and then you click on the magnifying glass and you see the date of birth, and it's a little bit different than what you'd expect.

logical inference in Google search results, which is very sad. Because of course, if you plug in that date and say who was the prime minister of Great Britain in 1956, you'll then get a million hits that tell you the answer was Anthony Eden. Part of the impressiveness of Google is that it has trained us to be content with, to not expect even that kind of one step logical logical search results in Google. Google is a search engine that allows people to search for information, and it's used by people all over the world. It's a great tool for people who want to learn more about the world around them, and for those who just want to know more about themselves and their lives, and those who are just looking for a little bit more information about themselves, and to find out who they are, and what they are interested in. It is based on the search engine's algorithms, and that's what makes it so impressive.

Give you a list of the symptoms of a particular skin disease, and then it will tell you what kind of treatment you need to take to get rid of the disease. And it will also tell you if there are any side effects to the treatment, and if so, it will give you the names of those side effects, and it will then tell you how to take care of the side effects of the treatment. And if you have a left brain AI, it's brittle in its own ways, but it has a lot of the same capabilities as a right brain AI. So, the next question is, how do you deal with a problem like this, and what do you do to deal with it? And the answer is, you can't really do anything about it, but you can take a picture of it, and you can put it on a computer. And then you can use that computer to help you solve the problem, and the computer will do the rest of the work for you.

Artificial Intelligence got me into about 40 years ago, which was the ELISA or doctor program that Joe . . AI got me in to AI about 40 yrs ago, and it was a program that got me interested in AI. It was called the Doctor Program, which is a computer program that was designed by Joe , and he was able to get me into AI. Joe 's doctor program got him into AI because he wanted to be a doctor, but he didn't know how to get into AI, so he went to Joe and asked him to teach him how to do the doctor program. Joe taught him, and then he got into AI and started to teach people how to use the computer program, and that's how he ended up in the field of artificial intelligence. Joe's computer program is called the AI Doctor Program. Joe and his computer program are a couple of people who have been working on artificial intelligence for a long time.

You would talk to it and you would say things like, I'm trying to quit smoking. You would say, tell me more about how you feel about trying to quit smoking and so on. One of my favorite interactions was when I said, my dog's mother died recently and it said, tellme more about your mother, which at one level is a deep Freudian insight, a rogerian psychiatrist played by Weizenbaum at MIT, which played a Rogerian psychiatrist, and one of his favorite interaction was when he said, "My dog, my mother, died recently, and I told you about my mother. At one level, that's Freud's deepest insight, and at another level, it's just a human being telling me what I want to tell you. So, that was my favorite interaction, and that was one of the things that I liked the most about it.

This is a lot like the Gary Larson far side cartoon of what you say to the dog and what the dog actually hears. For those of you who may be cat people, I will show you the rarely seen cat version of the far side Cartoon of What You Say to the Dog and What the Dog Actually Hears. Then we'll talk about how we can use computers to help us understand the world around us and how we might be able to use computers in the future to help solve some of the world's most pressing problems, such as climate change, global warming, and other global issues that are important to our survival. The computer is able, of course, to do all of these things, but it's also a very powerful tool for teaching us about the world and about ourselves and about our place in the universe. It's a tool that can be used to teach us about ourselves, about the universe, and about the cosmos.

What you say to the cat and what the cat actually hears. And anyway, even if you look at the best chat bots today, you'll see that they have that kind of ELISA-like garbling, or in this case where we ask one of the chatbots, where is Sue's nose when Sue is in her house and it says where it belongs, which is actually not a bad answer, but it then ruins it by going on and saying, oh, I don't know, I'm not sure, but I think it's a good idea to have a conversation with the chat bot, so that you can get a sense of what they're saying, and then you can ask them questions, and they'll be able to tell you what they want to know, and that's what we're going to talk about today, so let's talk about what you're talking about.

Francis Galton was a mathematician and a theoretical physicist, and he said, "The wisdom of the crowd is the power of more being more. And sometimes you can hear this referred to as the Wisdom of the Crowd, which goes back to Francis G. Galton in the early 1900s when he a mathematical theorist, a statistical machine learning expert, in the late 19th and early 20th century, when the first computers were being developed, and they were able to do a lot of computations, but they were also unable to do much of anything with them, and that's what the veneer of intelligence is all about. So each of these suffers from its own kind of brittleness bottleneck, but each also has enormous power. The power of statistician machine learning is a power of the wisdom of a crowd, and sometimes you'll hear this called the wisdom

Newton's law of universal gravitational attraction. Newton was at a county fair and he noticed that there was a jar with 800 guesses for how much this ox weighed. And I think whoever guessed right got, I don't know if they got the oX or they got some prize, but anyway, what he noticed was that the average of all of the 800 guessest was actually more accurate than any of the 800- guessest. And so he formulated this sort of law, which is now referred to as the law of conservation of energy, which states that the more energy a body uses, the greater its mass will be. So Newton formulated a law that states that if the mass of an object is constant, then that object will always have the same mass. So if there is a change in the mass, the mass will always be the same. And that's the law.

And the power of machine learning is not just that more is more, but also it's powerful because the effort to start up a machine learning solution is fairly low. You can grab one of the existing algorithms off the shelf, you can dump a large amount of data into it, and a day or two later you can : - The power of the machine learning system is that you can start it up, you don't need a lot of money, and you can do it in a matter of days. - So the power is that more and more data is more powerful than less and less data, and the more data you have, the more powerful your machine learning algorithm is going to be. And the more you have the more power you're going to have. And that's a good thing, because it means that you'll be able to do more and do it faster, and it'll make your life easier.

Logical reasoning is transparent, you can actually see the step-by-step logical reasoning, and unlike statistical connections, is related to links, so even if you have a logical derivation which is hundreds or thousands or tens of thousands of steps long, you still can trust Logic is a kind of trust. So it's transparent. It's related to the links. So you can even trust the logical logic. So that's the power of statistics. The power of logic is trust. And unlike statistical connection, is connected to links. Even if we have logical adequacy which is thousands or hundreds or hundreds of thousands or thousands of thousands, we can still trust the logic. Logical derivations are transparent. They're related to a link. And so you can trust that the logic is transparent. And like statistical connections are related to connections. So, you're actually up and running and actually get useful, actionable results.

What's the difference between a human and a robot? And it'll tell you, and you can ask it questions like, "What's your favorite color?" And it will tell you the answer, and if you're lucky, you might even get a little bit of a surprise. So that's a short demonstration of what I'm talking about here. So if the demo gods don't conspire against this, I can actually stop this and give you a brief demonstration of the results. So let me go ahead and do that. So this is a program called PSYCH, CYC, that as John said, our company has been developing over the last few decades. And here we've just, for fun, asked it a bunch of questions, and so you can say things like, What do you like to do in your spare time? And I'll show you how to do it.

a table is flammable, so let's unplug it and plug it back in. And fortunately, that gets us by 80% of the time. So here, the system is basically saying, well, a table's a fire hazard, so it's not a good idea to put it in a place that's going to cause it to combust. And the answer is, oh, that doesn't make any sense. So one of the common sense heuristics that we develop in our culture is if something isn't working, unplumb it and plunk it back into place. And here, we're essentially saying, if you don't have a flamethrower, you can't put it out there. So this is a great example of how a system can be used to help prevent fires.

can be retrieved easily. So that's good. So if I take another example question would be something like, can an upside down coffee cup hold coffee? And it basically says no. And if you ask why, it has to do with the fact that in general, if your turn an open container upside down, the stuff inside will fall out. Assuming that you're doing that in an environment where the stuff in a coffee cup is able to re-hydrate itself, so it's a good question. So I'm going to take a look at a table and I'll show you how to put it upside down on top of the table, and then you can put the coffee in the coffee cup and you can take the coffee out of the cup and put it back in the cup. And then you'll see that the table is upside down and the coffee is still inside the cup, so you can see the coffee still inside.

a coffee cup filled with helium, the answer might be yes. But in the case of something like a coffee mug filled with marbles, for a cup of coffee filled with coffee, it might be no. But if we ask even more complicated questions, like involving conceptual works, for coffee cups filled with water, for cups of coffee containing coffee, for cup of water containing water, and so on and so forth, then the answer would be no, because the answer is no because the atmosphere or the environment is less, is more dense than the atmosphere and the environment. So if you were doing this with a mug of coffee or a glass of water and you were trying to determine if the coffee cup was more dense or less dense than a marble, or if it was less dense or more dense then you would have to ask the question, is the answer less dense, is less dense then the environment or the atmosphere.

Psych is able to give you the step-by-step reasoning for a lot of different questions. Now, if you're looking for more information about Romeo and Juliet, you can go to a psych clinic and ask questions about the book. You can also go to the library and ask a librarian if they can give you a copy of the book, or you can ask your teacher or your therapist if there's anything else that you need to know about the story. And you can also ask your parents or your teacher if the book is available at your local library or if it's available at a local bookstore. And again, psych will be happy to help you with any questions that you might have. And then, you'll be ready to go to your library and start looking for the book that you've been looking for. And that's all for today's lesson. Have a great time and have a good night.

This is basically the fact that Juliet believes that at the time that she's under this spell, Romeo will actually believe a lot of the things that she thinks are true, and that's why she believes that Romeo is the one who is going to save her, because he's the one that will save Juliet, and he will save Romeo, and Juliet's going to be able to get out of this situation, because Romeo's not going to have to go through this situation again, because Juliet will be in love with Romeo at the moment that she is under the spell, and she'll be happy to have Romeo in her life, because she will have a happy life, and Romeo won't have to deal with this situation anymore, because the system will take care of everything for her, so that she will never have to worry about Romeo ever again, and this is why Juliet is so happy, because this is the reason why Romeo loves Juliet so much.

'll receive a message that she's still alive even during the time that they've planned something, the plans will happen and that Juliet believes that Romeo 's going to have received a Message from Juliet that she is still alive and so on. And to take an even more complicated question, although that was pretty complicated because we're talking about what Juliet thinks Romeo's 'going to have a conversation with Juliet's sister, Juliet is going to tell Romeo that she loves him and that he loves her and that she has feelings for him, and that's why Juliet wants to know if Romeo will have received the message. And so, the final question is, does Romeo believe Juliet will be able to tell Juliet, because she loves Romeo, or does Juliet believe Romeo won't believe her because he doesn't love Juliet? And the final answer is, I don't know.

Disincentives is based on incentives and not on disincentivizes, which means that the apothecary's incentive is to sell Romeo that fatal poison that he buys near the end of Act IV. In this case, there are incentives, namely it turns out that the agent is extremely poor and really needs the money, and there are disencentives because the law of the Law of Negatives is a law that states that if the agent believes about Juliet at some hypothetical future time and so on. We could basically take a question like what are the apologist's positive and negative for selling Romeo a fatal poison, that's the fatal poison Romeo buys at the end o f Act IV, and we could basically ask a hypothetical question like this: What are the incentives for Romeo to buy that fatal potion? And we could actually take this hypothetical question and we would ask the question, what are Romeo's negative and positive incentives for selling Juliet a deadly potion, and then we would take the hypothetical question that we would be asking and we'd ask the questions that we're going to be asking: What is Romeo going to do with the potion if he doesn't buy it? And then we'll ask the following questions: What does Romeo think of Juliet? What does Juliet think of Romeo? And so on and so forth.

The apothecary is subject to the code of conduct of the place he's living, which is Mantua, and so on. I could go on a little bit about this, but let's just say that the aphecary, if he sells a fatal poison, the punishment for that if you're caught is to be executed and in general, people don't like being executed, and all of this is represented in logic and this is basically just the fact that he has a duty to follow the rules of his place of residence, which in this case, is the city he lives in, which means he can't sell fatal poison. And so, I could just go on and on, but I'll just say one thing, and that's that a person who sells fatal poison can be executed if they are caught, and if the person is caught, he or she can be put to death.

a better way to find things to do in Austin, Texas and instead of just relying on something like Yelp or other reviews, they thought it would be better if they had a system that would help them find the things they wanted to do and that would give them the information they needed to make a decision. And that's what we did with Accenture for South by Southwest, and it's a great example of what we're doing with this system and how it can be used for a lot of different applications, and I'm going to give you a different kind of demo though of the system doing an actual application, and this was something we did ... and it was something that we did for South By Southwest. Thousands of people come to Austin, and there are about four or five hundred things to eat and drink and do and there's about three or four hundred things that you can do and you can't just go to a restaurant and say, "Hey, I want to go to this restaurant, but I don't know where it is." And instead of going to the restaurant and saying, "Oh, here's this restaurant," you go to the website, and you type in "Austin, Texas" and you'll get a list of restaurants that are nearby. And you can click on one of those restaurants and it will give you the information you need to make an informed decision about where to go and what to do.

's a great place to go to if you're looking for a nice place to hang out and have a good time with your friends and family, and it's also a really good place to meet new people, because you can meet people from all over the world, and you can also meet people that you don't know, and that's great because you'll be able to get to know people from a lot of different places, and they'll all be really nice people to meet, because they're going to be really cool people, and Psych will be really helpful in helping you find the right people for the right job, because Psych is really good at matching people up with people that they think are good for the job, and then Psych can also help you find people that are the right fit for you, and the best part is that Psych doesn't have to be a psychologist, they can be anybody.

Psych is a dog trainer and he's got a lot of experience with dogs and if you bring your dog, you're liable to slip and fall because the trails are going to be slippery because Psych has a couple of con reasons because it's not dog friendly, and you said you wanted to bring your dogs and because you 're like what the hell? Why are you likely to fall? Because you can basically get Psych to tell you the reasons why, which basically are why am I likely to 'fall'? Well, it 's because the trail's gonna be slippery, because the 'trail' is made out of sand, and it ain't gonna stay slick, so you'll be able to walk on it, but it'll sloem and you won't have a good time because it sucks.

weather forecast for the next day or the next week or the week after that, so that we can make sure that we're prepared for the weather and that we don't have to worry about getting wet or getting lost or anything like that because we know that the weather is going to be fine and it's not going to rain and we'll have a great time and we won't get wet and we can go on with our lives and enjoy the outdoors because we've got a plan and we have the right gear and we know how to use it and that's how we'd like to spend our time and our money and we want to have fun and enjoy our life and we just want to be safe and have fun, so we want the weather to be good and that means that we have to be prepared for whatever the weather may bring and we need to be ready for whatever it may bring, and we also need to know that there's an 80 to 100% chance of rain in 24 hours right before you're going to visit it and the trails there are slippery and you probably didn't bring proper foot gear with you because you 're traveling and you live outside Austin and so on. So at any given point, we can reject any of these like I can say I actually did bring the right thing with me and then have the system recalculate its weather forecast

talking about is really good. So we can do more demos or questions at the end if you're interested and if we have time. So what are the strengths and weaknesses? What are the places where current machine learning technology really falls down where the symbolic kind of AI that I was just chatting about is actually good. Okay. So I think you get the gist of that one. Okay, so let's talk about Hamilton Pool. Hamilton Pool is a machine learning system that is designed to learn to swim. It's designed to swim in a pool of water, and it's able to swim for a long time. It has a very powerful algorithm that can swim for long periods of time. The algorithm is based on the fact that it can swim in any water. So it can be used for swimming, diving, snorkeling, diving in the ocean, and so on. So you can use it for swimming and diving, diving underwater, diving into the ocean. It can also be used as a swimming pool.

And so one of the clearest types of examples of those are where there's very little training data. There isn't big data available. An example of that is an application we did for a large oil company and one of their conditions of interest they wanted the system to detect were when there was about to be a containment failure and essentially a blowout was going to happen and so if you're looking at a situation where you have very little data and you've got a very limited amount of training data, you can't really get a good idea of what the system is going to do and how it's going to work. And so a lot of the time, you'll have to do a little bit of experimentation to figure out what's the best way to train the system and how to get the most out of the data that's available to you. And that'll be the next step.

faults, you need to be able to identify the faults and fix them, and then you're going to have a lot of training data for your system, and you'll be in business for a very long time, and so you've got to make sure that you have all the training data that you need, and if you don't have that, then you can't do anything about it, and that's the kind of thing that you want to avoid, because it's going to cost you a great deal of money to fix all these faults, and it'll take a long time for you to get that training data back, so you want your training data to be as good as it can be, so that you can get back to doing what you do best, which is training your employees, and making sure that they're doing what they should be doing, because if they aren't, then they won't get the training that they need.

temperature, so it's very common to make the one fault assumption which is hope there's only one thing going wrong like we did with unplugging and replugging in the cable there. If you have two things going wrong at once, they're often very, very hard to figure out what's going on, especially if they superpose like one medical condition raises your temperature and one health condition lowers your temperatur , so you're going to have a very difficult time figuring out what is going on with your body and what is the cause of the problem, so if you've got a medical condition that's raising your temperature, you'll want to make sure that you get it checked out as soon as you can so that you don't have to wait a long time for it to get checked out and then you can get it fixed as quickly as possible so that it doesn't get worse.

So this is an example of a program that Psych Power is called Mathcraft which helps sixth graders and fifth grade students doing math, learning math, and in this case, very simple linear equation and they have to solve it, a sixth grade problem and they get this horrible answer instead of the correct answer which is four, they get a horrible answer. So that's how psych power helps students learn math, it's a computer program that helps students solve math problems, teaches them how to solve problems, and it also has a very simple interface, so it doesn't take a lot of time to use it, so you can use it anytime you want to learn math and you can do it on your computer or on your phone, and you don't have to worry about your computer being hacked or anything like that. So if you're looking for a way to help your child learn math or if your child is having trouble with math, this is a great place to start.

213 to both sides of the equation and they got 213 as a wrong answer. So how in the world did they get 213? It would take you a long time, I think, to try to figure out what they did wrong. If you watch them do their work, you can see the first step they did was right which is to add 34 to both side of the Equation but then they did 213 and they get a right answer of 213 which is a terrible answer to the equation. So what do you think they did right? If you look at the equation, you see that it has two sides and the first side has 34 and the second side has 213 so the answer is 213 - 213 = 213. So how do you feel about that answer? Is it a good one or a bad one? I don't know. I think it's a pretty good one. I mean, it doesn't really matter what you think about it. It's just a really bad answer.

They got from 11X to X by subtracting 11 so instead of dividing 44 by 11, they subtracted 11 from 44 and then they made another mistake when they were doing that subtraction, they borrowed when they didn't have to. So they did something like that, now they weren't sure what to do so they did like 14 minus 1 is 13 and 3 minus 2 is 2 and that's how they got X minus X and X plus X equals X. So the final answer is X + X = 11X - 11X = X which is the same as 11X + 11X. Then they divide 44 by 11 to get 44 / 11 = 44. So instead of subtracting 11 from X, they divided 44 by 11. Then instead of doing a subtraction of 11, they did a division of 44 by 4 and they got 44 - 4 = 44 which is a perfect square.

So the psych system models the person who is the user of the application, and is able to figure out what one or two or three things they might have done wrong, plausibly not really deducing it so much as abducing or guessing what they might has done wrong and then figures out how to remediate that, and as we saw before is capable of doing fairly good natural language generation from the logic so Psych System Models the Person Who Is the User of the Application, and Is able To Figure Out What One Or Two Or Three Things They Might Have Done Wrong, Plausibly Not Really Deducing It So Much As Abducing Or Guessing What They May Have Doen Right And Then Figures Out How To Remediate That, And As We See Before Is Abducted Or Attempting To Deduce It So Is Capable Of Doing Fairly Good Natural Language Generation From The Logic

figured it out after a lot of trial and error. Now this application, Mathcraft, was actually part of an interesting, almost paradigm changing Unity application that we did for the sixth graders and effectively it's based on this phenomenon you've probably all experienced in your life where you thought you understood something, but then you only really figured out it when you were a little bit older. So this application is a kind of a game that you can play with your friends or with your classmates and you have to try to figure out how to solve the puzzles that you're trying to solve and you can't really understand it if you don't have a teacher to help you. So that's what we're going to be talking about today. So let's start with the English explanation if there's an English teacher comes out looking in a readable fashion. Now, this application Mathcraft is actually a part of ...

Mathcraft is a game that allows you to solve math problems in a way that you would not normally be able to do in the real world. It's a great way to test your knowledge of math and to get a sense of what it's like to be a mathematician in real life. The game has a very simple interface that is very easy to use. The main goal of the game is to teach you how to solve real world math problems and to have fun while you're doing it. The goal is to have a good time while you are doing it and to learn a lot of new math skills. It is also a fun game to play with your friends or with your family and to just have some fun with your own math problems. You can download the game for free from the Mathcraft website and you can play it for as long as you'd like. You don't have to worry about having to pay for it.

avatar is able to solve the problems in their environment like this stuck door and so on and if you give them good advice about the problems then the avatar will solve the problem in his or her environment and he or she will solve all the problems that are in the environment and they'll solve all of the math problems that they have to solve and they will solve their math problems in the best way that they can and that's how you solve math problems and you solve your math problems because you're a math teacher and you have to teach math to your students and you've got to teach your students how to solve problems and then you can solve your own math problems as well and you can also help your students to solve their own problems because they're not good at math and they don't know how to do math problems, so you can help them solve their problems by giving them some good advice and then they can solve all their problems in a better way and they won't have to worry about math problems anymore.

Summary and Next Steps:** Psych is a simulation-based learning system that uses avatars to help students learn. It's a very different kind of educational paradigm that could be used and is being used in training not just for kids but also for military . Psych's model of what you understand gets updated and as a result of that Psych doesn't have the avatar make that mistake very much anymore. As a consequence of that, you get this engagement because you feel like you've taught the little avatar something. So, it's an very different sort of instructional paradigm that can be used , and it could also be used in military training , not only for kids , but for military as well. - Psych has been used in the military for a long time , so it has a lot of applications , especially in military , because it is very interactive , very interactive and very interactive.

network to do it yet, so I don't know what will happen if I hook this up to my network. I haven't hooked it up yet, because I didn't have the network to hook it up to. So I'm going to go back to the beginning of the video and I'll show you a few examples of situations where machine learning has trouble, and then we'll talk about some of the problems that we've seen in the past, and we're going to show you some examples of problems that have been around for a long time. So let's start with a scenario where you have a policy decision you're considering and you want to know what the impact of that is, but you haven’t made that policy decision yet. So there's a situation that you’re considering, and you’ve made that decision and you'd like to know how the impact will be if you hook that up to your network.

U.S. has been helping to keep the world safer by out thinking or pre-thinking terrorist attacks and this is one of the major ways in which the U. S. has helped to keep terrorist attacks from happening in the first place because we have a lot of data yet or we want to do a counterterrorism scenario so I want to imagine bad outcomes and what series of events could have brought them about and keep hypothesizing things back in time until I get to things which I can actually check on and a l lot of been effectively helping to make sure that terrorist attacks don't happen in the future because we've been able to predict them in the past and that's why we're so effective at keeping the world safe because we can predict the future and we can prevent terrorist attacks in the present because we know what the future is going to look like and we know that there are going to be terrorists and we'll know what they're going to do.

So instead of referring to it as ML suffers let's put a more euphemistic way of putting it that ML could benefit by partnering with symbolic logic based AI if the things we've talked about already there's little or no data because of rarity or the multi fault hypothesis happening or if you're a government is able to avoid confirmation bias and think out of the box and cover more future possibilities. So if we're going to talk about ML, we'll talk about it in a way that's a little bit euphoric and a lot of the time it's not referred to as a ML problem. It's more of a problem of how do we make sure that we don't make the same mistake over and over again. So rather than reiterating it as it is, let me just put it this way, ML is a machine learning problem, and ML can't solve it.

diagnosed her as having meningitis because they didn't know what was wrong with her brain and they couldn't give me a straight answer from the doctors about why they were treating her and what they were going to do about it because they were not able to give me the straight answer that I was looking for and that's why I started on this journey about 36 years ago when my daughter was very young at the time she's fine now and when we took her into Stanford Hospital I could not get a strait answer from them about how they were diagnoizing her because they weren't sure what was going on with her and they could not tell me what was causing her brain to be inflamed and what was the cause of her brain being irritated and what the cause was of the brain being inflamated and why it was inflaming the brain and why the brain was irriting the brain.

1. **Overview:** - Give a clear introduction to the topic. - Mention the key concepts and subtopics to ensure the content flows logically without unnecessary repetition. 2. **Detailed Description:** Explain the main idea of the story. 3. **Answer:A] - Provide a brief summary of the problem. 4. **Case Study:*** - Describe a medical diagnosis program called MISON. 5. Describe how the program came up with exactly the same diagnosis. 6. Describe what the program did for the patient. 7. Describe why the program worked. 8. Describe the results of the program. 9. Describe some of the problems that the program solved. 10. Describe an example of a program that solved a patient's problem. 11. Describe one of the programs that the author used. 12. Describe another example of the author's use of the MISON program. 13. Describe at least one example of what the author did.

MISON was able to show us step by step what the argument was what the reasoning was behind it and that really made all the difference in the world for my wife and myself to feel comfortable with what was going on and that was a kind of epiphany for me that really showed me MISON is a rule-based logical system that shows you how to understand the argument and how the reasoning is behind it so that you can understand what is going on in your life and how you can change your life for the better and that's really what made me a believer in MISON because it showed me that it's not just about what you say or how you say it but what you do with it and how it affects you and what you can do about it and what it can do for you and for your family and your friends and for yourself and for the rest of the world to understand what you are going through and that is really what showed me

In addition to being right, it's often important to understand the argument behind what it is that you're saying often we don't just want one right answer we want the plausible the most likely answers and an argument for and against each one of them that's true in medical diagnosis it’s true, counterintelligence reasoning, for instance here when the Madrid train station bombing happened, a lot of people have a hard time understanding what's going on in the context of what they're talking about, so it'll be helpful to have an understanding of the arguments behind what you are saying, so that you can get a better understanding of what the argument is and how it fits into the context that you are talking about and to be able to make a more informed decision about what to do about it, so you can be more informed about the situation and how to deal with it in a way that makes sense to you and to the people around you.

ETA ETA is a separatist Basque terrorist group that is pretty much responsible for most of the bad stuff that has happened in Spain in the last several decades but psych was able to come up with a series of pro and con arguments for why it might or might not have been ETA because ETA has been responsible for a lot of bad things that have happened in spain in the past several decades and psych has a number of reasons for why ETA might not be responsible for some of the things that happened in the spanish civil war and the war in el salvador , for example , ETA was responsible for the murder of a spanish soldier who was shot dead by a sniper during a raid on a barricade in santander , spain , in the early 1990s , and for the bombing of an embassy in london .

And the same kind of thing happens if you have a problem which multiple experts would have their own opinions on, and it's not like you want to listen to any one of them to make the most informed decision you , and you're going to have to make a decision based on the opinions of multiple experts on the same problem, and that's what we're talking about here, and we'll talk about that in a moment. So, the first thing that we need to talk about is the fact that there are multiple experts who have different opinions on a topic, and they're not all going to agree on what's the best way to solve the problem. And the second thing is that there's a lot of people who are going to disagree with each other about what the best thing to do is, and I'm not going to go into the specifics of that, but I'll just talk about one of the things that we've talked about in the past, which is that you have to be able to make your own decisions.

a lot of people are arguing with each other and then make your own decision and there's no reason why symbolically you can't separately model each of those individuals and what advice or what conclusions they would have given so in many cases the person who's best at some task is much much much better than the average person at that task one common reason this is true is tasks where a LOT of people ARE arguing against each other so that's why it's so important to have a model of each of these individuals and how they're arguing and then making your own decisions so that you can really want to hear all of them arguing together and then you can make a decision and you can do this in a way that is meaningful to you so that when you're trying to figure out who is the best at a task, you'll be able to figure that out because you've got all of these people arguing.

a lot of other questions that they want to ask and they don't have the time to ask them and they're not sure what to ask or how to ask the question and so on and so forth, and that's a problem that we're going to address in a second segment, but for now, let's focus on one of the most common problems that we see in the industry, which is that the user thinks they have a question that they'd like to ask, but in fact there are often a lot more questions than they think they have to ask that aren't related to the user's question, and the user doesn't really know what they are looking for, so they just ask the same question over and over again, and they get the same answer every time, and it's just a waste of time for the user, because they've already asked the same thing a thousand times before.

a few days later that would come back and the doctor would look at the results and say oh well obviously I did a few iterations involved so an example we did for the Cleveland Clinic where their experts doing clinical trial cohort selection would come up with a question they would articulate it to a nurse the nurse would talk to - the database person who would write some customized sequel and sparkle - a couple of days later - then the patient would go to the clinic and they would go in the clinic, they would have a conversation with the experts and the nurses and the database people and the doctors would talk about what they were doing and what they wanted to do with the data and the data would be entered into a database and then the data was analyzed and the results would be presented to the patient and the patients would be able to make a decision about whether or not to participate in a clinical trial and then they would be asked to sign up for the clinical trial.

word count that would be required for a typical medical application, so we were able to let them put in fairly long questions, this is actually a short one, but some of the questions had 40, 50, 60 words in them, way beyond the level of grammatical accuracy that we would have expected for such a long question, and so in this application, we were also allowed to let people put in relatively long questions that were a little bit longer than a normal medical application would allow, which is a good thing, because some of these questions were 40 to 50 words in length, and that's a lot more than the average medical application allows, so it's really a great tool for people who want to get a better idea of what they're talking about, and it can also be a very useful tool for doctors who are trying to figure out what their patients really want to know, because it can give them a more accurate picture of what's going on in their body.

Doctors, you're not able to understand what they're saying because you don't know what they really meant or unless you really really Psych is a computer program that recognizes fragments of speech and interprets them into words that can be used in a variety of contexts to help people understand the world around them and to help them make better decisions about their health and well-being. It's a great tool for people who want to learn more about their bodies and how they work, and it's also a wonderful tool for anyone who wants to learn about their brains and how the brain works and how it affects their lives and the way they think and feel about themselves and their relationships and their jobs and their families and their careers and the things that are important to them in their life and in their work and their lives in general. It can also help people who are trying to figure out what they want to do in life and how to get there.

Psych brings to bear medical - medical is a term used to describe a mental health professional who brings medical information to bear on a patient's medical condition. The purpose of Psych is to bring medical information about patients to bear in a medical setting. Psych specializes in medical psychiatry, which focuses on bringing medical information into the medical setting and presenting it to the patient as a form of medical emulation. In this context, Psych can also be used to bring to bear information about a person's mental health condition that is related to a specific medical condition, such as heart disease, lung disease, cancer, or a variety of other medical conditions. In Psych, medical information is brought to bear by a Psychiatrist, a doctor who is able to bring the medical information of a particular patient to bear. In the context of this lesson, the doctor is presenting Psych to the student.

elicits an English paraphrase from the fragments and then it puts them together generates an American paraphrase and a grammatically correct paraphrase of the English paraphrasing and if the paraphrase is correct then it generates a British paraphrase which is a form of a paraphrase in the English language and the grammatical correctness of the elicited paraphrase can be used to generate an English parser and an English rephraser which is the same as the rephrase in English and the English word paraphrase, which is an English word that can be translated into a number of different languages and is used in a variety of contexts and contexts in the same way as the English words paraphrases and grammatically correct parsers, which are used in many different contexts as well as in the context of the context in which they are used, such as the context where they are being used, for example in the classroom where the teacher is using a word that has a different meaning than the word that the student is using, or in the workplace where the employee is using the same word that they are using, and so on and so forth.

45 or 60 years or a little bit longer. So let me give you a couple minutes summary of what the technology is. I've talked about the two sources of power and it's important to recognize and many of you are young enough that you may not recognize that both of these technologies have been around for depending on how you count 40 or 45 or 62 years or so. So I'm going to talk about Psych and I'll talk about two of the technologies that we're going to be talking about in this class. So Psych is a machine learning system that uses artificial intelligence to learn about people's behavior. It's a system that learns about their behavior and then uses that information to create a personalized profile of that person. So that's what Psych does. So the next part of this lesson is going to teach you how to use Psych. So we'll start by talking about how Psych works.

In the 1960s and throughout the 1970s, there were neural net based statistical based machine learning systems available. I worked on many of those while I was at Stanford in the early and mid and late 70s in fact, but what they were waiting on was not so much an insight as it was they are waiting on computers to get a better understanding of what they're doing and how they are doing it. So, what they had to wait for was computers to be able to do the computations that they needed to get the insights that they wanted to get, and that's what we're going to talk about in the next couple of minutes. Now, what are some of the things that we'll be talking about in a moment? We'll talk about a couple of examples. First of all, what is a neural net? It's a machine learning system that uses neural nets to learn. And it's designed to do a lot of different things. And the first of those things is that it learns from the data that it has. And so, the next thing that we will talk about is how the neural net works.

Technology to catch up with the algorithm in the left brain case, yes we were also waiting for computers to get faster, but there were really about 150 engineering problems that had a technology that was able to solve them, and that was the algorithm that was used in the right brain case and it was a very simple algorithm, it was very simple and it worked very well, but it took a long time to get it to work well, and we had to wait for the algorithms to get better and better, and it took us a lot of time to figure out how to do it, because we were waiting for the algorithm to come along, and the algorithms that we were using were very simple, they were very fast, and they worked well, so we were just waiting for technology to get up to speed with the algorithms, and so on, and yes there were one or two ideas that had to come around, like convolution and so forth, but mostly it was just waiting

And the idea was in about 1980 that a large knowledge base of tens of millions of general rules of common sense and so on and we had to prime the pump with this large knowledge based knowledge base so I'm not going to go through the 150 engineering challenges that I've mentioned one or two of them already and I'll talk about one of them in the next few minutes but the idea in about about 1980 was that we have a big knowledge base that we can use to solve the 150 challenges that we've talked about in the last couple of minutes and we're going to talk about some of those challenges in a few minutes and the idea is that we are going to use this knowledge base to solve these 150 challenges and then we'll go through some of these challenges and we will talk about a couple of them and then I'd like you to think about the next five minutes and you'll think about what you've just heard.

Congress actually did something that's how you can tell it was several decades ago, Congress basically said we're going to pass something called the National Cooperative Research Act because we are concerned about the Japanese fifth generation computer effort and if you look at the text of the bill, you can see that it's a bill that was passed by Congress in the late 1960s and early 1970s, and it was aimed at promoting cooperation between the United States and Japan in the field of artificial intelligence, and I was making a lot of noise about that, and Congress actually passed something that I'm going to show you in a moment, and that is the National Robotics and Artificial Intelligence Act, which is a piece of legislation that Congress passed a few decades ago that basically said, you know, we are going to take a look at this problem, and we'll try to figure out what we can do about it, because we know that we can't solve this problem alone.

Professor, I'm going to talk about research consortia in the U.S. The first one was called MCC in Austin, Texas and Admiral Bob Inman went to run that one of the smartest people I've ever met, and he came to visit me at Stanford and said, hey professor , I want to talk to you about how we can make sure that we don't have to prosecute big companies for antitrust law violations, and that we're going to let big companies work together on R&D and not prosecute them for anti-trust laws violations. And so research consortiums sprang up in the United States, and the first one that I'll talk about is the MCC, which is the largest research consortium in the world, and it's based in Texas, and I think that's the best example of a research consortium because it was founded by a man named Admiral Robert Inman.

get this done, you're going to be able to live to see the end of it and the good news is that since you folks have waited 35 years to get it done, we'll have ten times as many people working on it and you'll just barely survive to see it. And the bad news is, you folks are going to have to move to the wilds of Austin, Texas and we're gonna have 10 times that many people, working on this project, and you guys are gonna just barely live to eat to get to the finish line. And that's going to take a lot of time and a ton of money. And we've got to figure out a way to make that happen. And you guys have gotta figure out how to do that. And I think we can make it happen. I mean, we have a couple of things that we can do. One, we need to find a place where we can get the money to do this. And two, we can find some people to help us. And three, we want to find people who are willing to work with us.

In the last decade, we've built a large collection of this large ontology of rules of thumb like ownership transfers through physical parts, causes proceed effects, and if some device isn't working, try turning it off and on again and things like that, and we're actually at the end of that process and we do have this technology that can actually be applied, which is pretty exciting, so what we have built in those decades is this large collection - a collection of a very large set of ontologies of things like ownership, ownership transfers, physical parts and causes and effects, if you're interested in learning more about this topic, you can listen to the podcast on this topic here - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUuUuuUUUuYuU - and you can also listen to this podcast here: https://youtu.be/xUUhUuyuU

tens of millions of those general rules of thumb things which often aren't stated explicitly because they're things that everybody knows in fact if you Google things like water flowing uphill and water flowing downhill you get more , like that and when I talk about ten of millions , of those I'm not talking about kind of facts that you would find on Wikipedia or that youd access in some database , you're talking about these general rule of thumb , things which sometimes aren’t explicitly stated because they’re things , that everyone knows, in fact you can actually get more information about water flowing , uphill , downhill by doing a Google search , and you'll get a lot more information , than you'd get from a simple search on the Internet , or you can do a search on Google and you will find a ton more information than you would get from any other search engine .

Here's a list of some of the terms we're going to talk about in this lesson. These are the general terms that we'll be talking about in the next few minutes. So we've got about 42,000, 43,000 different relations or functions or predicates that connect those different terms, and about a million and a half general terms. So these are the terms that are going to be talked about next. So let's start with the word uphill. This is a word that people are using as a kind of dramatic metaphor they don't really talk about water flowing uphill because everybody knows that water flows downhill so why actually say that? So we have about 42.000, 43.000 different relations that connect these different terms. And these are all the different types of functions or functions that are connected to each other. So this is the list of the functions that we will talk about next . So here's another list of all the functions and functions that have to do with water flowing downhill.

So this was what I meant by priming the pump, and just to show you that it really does work, and it really is important to prime the pump in this way, when we built that Cleveland Clinic application the amount of things we had to tell the system was down around the 100,000, 120,000 levels of things you had to telling the system, but if you're going to build a system that's going to have a lot of things that you have to tell it, it's important to make sure that you are priming it in a way that makes sense for the system to be able to do what you want it to do, so that you don't end up with a bunch of stuff that doesn't make sense, and then you'll end up having a whole lot of problems with the system because you've got to figure out what the system is going to do with all of these things. So this is what I mean by 'priming' the pump.

knowledge base, it's actually used many millions of things that were in its knowledge base and in fact if you ask a particular question like this and actually see what pieces of knowledge are used in the arguments ultimately something like 95% of what it was actually using to answer the questions were things that it had known years in most cases many years before the application was even started. And speaking of knowledge, it actually used much more knowledge than it had ever used before, and that's why it was able to answer so many of the questions that it was asked in the first place, because it had so much knowledge that it could have answered a lot more questions than it would have if it hadn't used so much of the knowledge it already had. So, what's the next step for me? I'm going to ask you a question, and you're going to say, "Well, what do you think about this?" And I'll ask you another question. And you'll say, well, what does this mean?

Chicago is a city with a lot of traffic, you can't see anything that's going on around you, so you're going to have to rely on your left brain thinking to keep you from getting into a situation where you'll have to stop and get out of the way of a car or a pedestrian or something like that, and you've got to keep your eyes on the road and keep your hands on the steering wheel and your feet on the brakes, and so on and so forth until you get to a point where you don't even need to look at the road, and then you can just drive around and have a good time and not worry about any of the things that are going to happen to you, because you can see everything that is going on in front of you as you drive around, and it doesn't matter if it's a red light, a stop sign, or anything like that.

You have to use your knowledge of it's a bag of stuff but is it McDonald's bag or is it a Home Depot bag or something like that. So what I do in terms of slamming on my brakes or swerving or just running it over depends on something I happen to know in the real world. But you have to know what you're going to do in the event of a wacky situation. And you've got to be able to recognize what's in the road that shouldn't be there. And what I'm gonna do is I'll look at the bag and see if there's anything in it. And if it is, then I will slam on the brakes and sway to avoid it. So that's how you'll know what to do if you see something in your road that you don't want to see.

a suitcase because it was too big then you know it's the thing I'm trying to stuff in the suitcase but if I just change one word and say it wouldn't fit in a suitcase then you'll know that's what it is because you're changing one word to change the meaning of the whole sentence. So when I talk about common sense tasks, I mean things like disambiguating sentences that have pronouns in them for example or polysemous ambiguous words. So if you say without even telling you what it it is if it wouldn’t fit if the suitcase was too small because it wasn’t big then it’s because you’re changing a single word to say it wasn't big. So you know that’s what I’m talking about when I say that sentence because you know the sentence isn’t the same sentence because it has a different meaning.

In the first sentence it refers to the suitcase not the thing I'm trying to stuff into it because big things don't fit into smaller things something that psych has known for about 30 years or if you look at this pair of sentences Fred was mad at Tom because he stole his lunch who stole whose lunch presumably Fred was Mad at Tom Because Tom stole Fred's lunch a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y4d4djc" target="_blank" width="460" caption="">Fred and Tom/a> were mad at each other because they stole lunches br>Thomas was angry at Fred for stealing his lunch and Fred was angry because Tom stole a lunch from Fred and Tom was angry about it cfm/cm> em>Tom was angry that Tom stole the lunch and he was mad about it

audience doesn't even think about it and so on. So anywhere you see these kinds of pronouns or ambiguous words the author or the speaker is presuming that the reader or the audience doesn’t even know that Fred was stealing Fred's lunch or that Tom was tampering with Tom’s lunch. So any time you see this kind of phrasing you're assuming that the speaker or the author is implying that you don't know what's going on in the story or that the story isn't true or that there's something wrong with the story. So whenever you see a word like that, it's a good idea to look it up in the dictionary or thesaurus and then you'll be able to figure out what it means to be a thief or a cheater or someone who's cheating on you or something like that.

Listener has and is going to bring to bear this body of common sense that we develop pretty much as two year olds and three year old and four year old. Here's another example where we're asking to find pictures that contain a situation where there's a man who's smiling and Psych is able to match this one which has a caption of someone helping his daughter take her first step. Psych doesn't Psych listener is a human being who has the ability to understand the world around him and to understand that he is not alone in the world and that we are all part of a global community and that there are people around the world who are just like us and we all have a responsibility to help each other out and to make the world a better place for all of us and that's what we'll be doing in the next few minutes and the next hour and a half and we will be talking about how we can help one another.

If you can't see a smiling person in the picture, then you're not a human being and you don't know that the father in that picture is smiling even if he's not smiling in the image. How can you tell if the father is smiling or not if you can only see the person from the front or the back of the adult from behind or maybe you see the cute little kid from the back but you only see some of the back or something but still you as human being know that you as a person know that there is a smile in that image because you can see the back and the front of the person and you can also see that the adult is smiling. How do you know if there's a father in this picture or not? How do we know that if we can only look at the image and not see the smiling person, then we are not human beings and we can not know that we are able to smile because there is no smile in this image.

Psych is able to recognize when a person is happy. It's because you have pieces of knowledge about the world like when you're happy you smile and if somebody you love accomplishes something then that makes you happy and generally parents love their children and so on and so when we axiomatize, when we represent in logic each of those things and we represent the captions and so forth, then psych is capable of recognizing when people are happy and when they aren't happy, and when people don't know when they're not happy, or when people's emotions are not satisfied, or if people are sad, then that's a symptom of psychiatric disorder, which is a disorder in which people are unable to express their emotions in a meaningful way. Psychiatry is the study of mental health, and it's an area of study in which psychologists study the relationship between emotions and mental health.

Difference in the sources of power and the strengths and weaknesses that they have. The main weakness that logic has is that the pieces the rules have is that they are very hard to understand and they have a lot of ambiguity and they don't really know what they're supposed to be doing and that's what I really am trying to get across the difference in the strengths of power that they've. And the main weakness of logic is that it has a very hard time understanding what it's supposed to do and it doesn't know what it should be doing. And so that is what I'm trying to really get across is the difference between logic and machine learning and the strength and the weakness that they both have. And that is the main strength of logic that it can very quickly find the connections even though the way it does it is completely different from the way machine learning would try to process the image in order to recognize things in the image, and that is why I think that it is very important to understand that the way that logic works is very different from how machine learning works.

AI is a set of rules that can be applied to any kind of problem that you can think of, and I've been talking about symbolic AI as if it's a kind of a computer program that can do a lot of things that we can't think of right now, but I think we can talk about it in a more general sense, and that's what we're trying to do in the Psych effort is to build that semantic glue that will make those pieces fit together that will relieve one of the limitations of symbolic AIs, which is that if you have narrow stove piped logic applications, the rules don't generally fit together very well, so part of the effort that we are doing in Psych is to help us build a system that can solve that problem, and we'll be able to use that system to solve some of the problems that we've had in the past, and so we want to make sure that we do that.

In actuality, most of the people doing symbolic AI are doing something using a much more limited logic than the kind of logic that I was showing you involving Romeo and Juliet where humans read that or see that play and they're able to understand the plot, they understand who , and they can understand who's gonna win, and who 's going to lose, and it's up to us to figure out how to make that happen, and that's what we're doing in Psych, which is a kind of symbolic AI, and I'm going to show you how to do that in a little bit more detail, and then we'll show you some examples of how we can use symbolic AI to help us figure out who is going to win and who isn't going to get what we want, and we can also show you a couple of examples of what we can do with symbolic AI.

are still a lot of questions that need to be answered using text processing. For example, how do you know if someone is a character in Romeo and Juliet? How do you find out if they are a person or a thing? How can you know that they are not a robot? How are you going to find out what they are doing? How does text processing work? How is text processing different from other methods of text processing? What is the difference between text processing and other text processing methods? What are the advantages and disadvantages of different text processing techniques? What do you think is the best way to answer these questions? What would you like to know about text processing in the future? What questions do you want to ask? What problems are you trying to solve? What kind of questions are you looking for answers to? What kinds of problems do you hope to solve in the next few years? What does the future hold for text processing as a whole? What challenges are you facing in the text processing field?

There's propositional logic where each of the statements is a kind of opaque, there are various sorts of limited logics which are special limited versions of first order predicate calculus and first order logic. Things like knowledge graphs and a knowledge graph is an awful lot that you really need a deeper kind of logic for, and what are those deeper kinds of logic? Well there are three limited kinds of logical, and these are the three kinds of limited logicals that we're going to talk about in this lesson. And these are three different kinds of limits of logic, and each of these limits is based on a different kind of knowledge graph. So we'll talk about these three different sorts of limits in the next part of the lesson. So the first thing that I'm going to show you is the first kind of limit of logic. And that's the first order logical limit. And the second one is the second kind of limitation. And this is the third kind of restriction, and it's called the first-order logical restriction.

geometry problem is a problem where you have seven things that you're given and then you have to prove three different statements so a typical geometry problem would be a geometry problem where we have a set of seven things and then we're going to prove that each of those seven things is the same so we'll say that we have seven different things that are the same and that we can prove that all of these seven things are equal so we can say that this set of 7 things is equal to the sum of all of the seven things so that's the number of things that we need to prove and we can then go on to solve the problem and then the next question is how do we solve this problem and the answer is that we use a Bayesian network and a property graph and so on and we basically can do things sort of at the level that we were doing geometry problems when we were in eighth grade where you've got some things and you have some proofs that you can prove and you can do this problem in a variety of different ways.

American mother and it's not the same American president but it is the same mother. So what separates all those limited logics is there are a set of things that you're trying to prove. One is do they actually admit universal and existential quantifiers. For instance every American has a mother and every American's a president, it 's the same president, but it ain 't the same ' mother '. So that's one thing that separates the limited logic from the rest of the world's limited logic. So one of the things that distinguishes the limits of limited logic is that they are not universal. So they're not universal, but they are existential. So for example every American, every mother, every president, every father, every sister, every brother, every wife, every son, every daughter, every grandson, every granddaughter, every grandchild, every great-grandchild.

In the second case, it's one single person who's the president, in the first case, one person is the mother for each person who is an American, and so on or can you have function symbols, can you can have relations ambiguous in English but not at all in any limited logic where you can use these quantifiers because the order of the quantifier tells you that in the second and the first cases, it is one person, and in the third case, for each American, there is a single person, who is the president and in each of the first and the second cases, there are one person who are the mother, and then in the fourth case, there's a person that's an American and in so on, or can we have relation ambiguity in English and in English, but it isn't at all ambiguuous in a limited logic, where we can use this quantifier, because it tells us that it is ambiguously in English.

Summary and Next Steps:** - Explain how to deal with negation in symbolic logic. - Give an example of a symbolic logic AI that takes three arguments, not just two, and can you have relations like plus that take any number of arguments, how do you deal with this? - Describe the problem of negation and how it can be dealt with in symbolic logic - Provide examples of symbolic logic algorithms that take three arguments and can they be used to solve this problem - Summarize and summarize the main points of the presentation - End with a question and answer session to help students understand the presentation of this presentation.  Copyright 2017 TEDTalks.com. All rights reserved. This is a recorded version of the lecture given by TED Talks, a live-streamed video on TED.com, that was produced by the TED Conference Center at the University of California, Berkeley, and is available on a limited basis for the purpose of teaching and learning. It is not intended to be used for any purpose other than personal, non-commercial use.

What about dealing with things that are only default true like birds can fly except penguins or birds can flight but with an exception of a bird over here that has a broken wing or something like that or things that were true in one context but false in another or how do you deal with the fact that you might believe something but you'll learn something if you don't believe something unless you're a neophyte or agnostic or someone who doesn't know what they're talking about unless they've studied the subject for a long time and you've got a lot of knowledge about the subject and you have a good understanding of the subject so you can apply that knowledge to your own life and you can use that knowledge in a way that's meaningful to you and that will make you a better person and that'll help you in your life and in your work.

In this lesson, you will learn how to maintain truth when you keep finding out new things and how do you do that efficiently so that's really the reason why there are this plethora of different logics and everything that people are using different representations and it all comes down to efficiency that you want to be able to get : - How do you maintain truth? - Why are there a lot of different logical representations? Why do people use a variety of representations to get the same thing? Why are people using a wide variety of logical systems to get different things? Why is there so much variety in representations that it's hard to know what's the best way to get what you want? Why does it take so long to find the right representation? Why can't we just use the same representations over and over again? Why doesn't it make sense to have a logical system? Why don't people just use one?

Theorem provers are notoriously slow. They can't wait until the heat death of the universe in order to get some proof to return. So unlike machine learning systems, if you're not careful, the logic half of the brain on the logic part of the AI will be extremely slow. So how is it that we can speed this up so what is the trade off if we can get answers to questions in real time or in the amount of time you have, and answers to the questions in a way that you don't have to wait until it's too late. So what are we going to do about this? We're going to build a machine learning system that can do this for us. And we'll be able to do this in the way that we want to do it. And that's going to be a lot of work, but we're also going to have a great deal of fun doing it.

Languages are extremely expressive that's why we talk in in languages but they're very difficult for computers to really get much traction on and do much with by contrast computers are extremely efficient for the machines to represent things and each representation lets you express more complicated things but is less efficient for machines to reason with so natural languages are extremely expressive that 's what we talk ' in natural languages and it's because we speak in ' natural languages ' but it a 'really difficult ' for computers ' to really ' get traction ' on and ' do ' much with ' by contrast ' computer ' languages are 'extremely expressive ' because they a're extremely expressive and they b' extremely difficult for machines 'to really  get  much  traction with  and do a lot  with b ' computers are very efficient  for the machine  they c ' are very  efficient for  machines  to  really get a good  grip  on  computers 

Programming languages are very difficult like how would we express Romeo and Juliet in prologue or in a triple store how would you express romeo and juliet in three word sentences theoretically it might be possible but it wouldn't be a pleasant experience for whoever had to write it or whose had to read it if you really tried to take something like that in that way so what we want is something that's a little bit easier to read and write and understand and it's something that we can use in our daily lives and that we don't have to worry about if we're going to be able to use it in our day to day lives and we can have a lot of fun doing it and that'll make us feel good about ourselves and we'll be happy to do it and we won't feel like we've done something wrong or that we haven't done something right.

Concepts: up and to the right but there is nothing there is no representation which is both efficient for computer programs and expressive in terms of what can be captured but the problem is even worse because most of the time even full first order logic is not enough because if you look at almost any real communications among people you find things which involve modals and other complicated modal modality modalities are complex modal structures that are used in a variety of different ways in different contexts and in different languages. They can be used in many different ways and they can be applied to many different types of communication. They are used for communication between people, between groups of people, and between nations and between different cultures. The problem is that they can not be used to communicate between people and between countries and between cultures because they are too complex and they are not able to communicate with each other because they do not have a common language. They do not know how to communicate.

Summary and Next Steps:** - Explain how to use the relationship symbol. - Describe the relationship between two things and the predicate symbol. ** Describe how to ask what relationships occur. --- Describe why each of these have the right answers and why are each of them true or if you look at almost any news --- Explain how you can use the relation symbol in a sentence to ask about the relationships between two different things. ** Explain how the relationship symbols can be used to ask questions about the sentences themselves. ** Discuss how the relation symbols can help you ask questions that are not just about the sentence itself, but also about the variables that are involved in the sentence. ** Demonstrate how the relationships occur between different things and how the variables are related to each other. ** Emphasize the importance of the variables. ** Give examples of how the variable is used in the sentences. ** Summarize how you use the variable.

a story about a person who is a whistleblower and he's trying to get you to believe that something is true dot dot doodle dot and you have a news story about Rod Rosenstein resigning yesterday but the point is that they're filled with the assumption that you the reader or you the listener will have no trouble hearing about things where person X at some time believed that person Y at some other time wanted them to believe in something that something was true if you're a reader or a listener and you want to hear about something where someone X and someone Y want you to think that something that's true is true then you'll want to read the article or listen to any news story on TV or on the web or something this is about Rod rosenstein's resignation yesterday because the point here is that the assumption is that you don't have any problem hearing about stuff where you have people who believe that someone else at some point in time believed in something and you've got a piece of paper that says, oh this is the truth and you can't believe it because you haven't read the paper or you have no idea what the paper is about and you think it's the truth so you read it and you believe it.

extending first order logic to higher order logics, which are understood by philosophers and have been for many years, and the trouble is that they're not extremely slow, except part of our focus in the last 35 years has been finding ways to speed that up, so in particular we speed up by extending second order logic, which is a higher-order logic, and that's one of the things that we're going to talk about in the next couple of minutes, so let's start with the first question, and it's a question of how we can express that understanding that processing it, because those things go way beyond what you can do in first order logical reasoning, and there are higher order reasonings, and those things are understandable by a philosopher, and they've been for a very long time, but the problem is that those aren't extremely fast, except we've found ways in the past 35 years to speed those up, and we'll talk about that in a moment.

epistemological problem of what should the system know from the heuristic problem of how can the system knows what the system is going to do and how can we do that and we map between them and that's really what I meant when I said we had not just one theorem prover we have 1100 reasoning engines 1100 different inference engines that are all working on every problem and every sub ephemeral problem that we can think of that we could think of and we can do that because we have a system that is able to do all of these things because we are separating the epistemological problems of what ought the system to know and the heuristic problems of how the system can know what it's going to be doing and how we can get that done and we're separating them and we are mapping between them so that when we say we have not just a one-size-fits-all theorist, we actually have 11,000 reasoning engines, 11,000 different inferencing engines, that are working on each problem and each sub problem.

And that's really what I meant when I said we had not just one theorem prover, we have 1100 reasoning engines, 1100 different inference engines that are all working on every problem and every sub problem and they raise their hand when they can make some progress and so as a community of agents , we are able to solve any problem that we can think of and we can map between them and we're not just a one-size-fits-all solution, we've got a lot of different solutions to every problem, and they're all working together on the same problem and we map between each other and we have a network of agents that are working together to solve each problem and each sub problem that they can think up and they can raise their hands when they've made some progress, and so we can build a system that solves all the problems in the world and we don't have to worry about how many agents we have or how many problems we have to solve.

a.m. computations to find out if Donald Trump is transparent or opaque. I don't have to do some seven a. m. computationals to figure that out. I can just look up Donald Trump on the internet and see if he's transparent or not. I'm not going to have to spend a lot of time on that. I just want to know if I can find out whether Donald Trump's transparency or not, because I don’t have a reasoner to do that for me. So, that’s how we solve this problem, and I think it’s a great way to solve a problem like this, because we can solve it in a way that's really really really fast. So if you want to solve this question, you can just use a machine learning algorithm to solve it, and it's going to be able to do it really fast, because you can cache any kind of transitive relation, cash, the transitive closure, or the cleanest are that relation.

step graph walk in an ontology I can just look it up in the cashed table for that relation and get the answer some of the 1100 are very domain specific like how to balance aqueous chemistry equations and so on but all together we're adding a few of these every week and so this set of agents is growing and together they're able to efficiently solve it and if we reach an application where the step graph walks in an Ontology we can just walk in a graph and we can look at the graph we can see that we have a set of graphs that we can walk in and we have these graphs in the ontologies and we just look up the graph that we've just walked in and look at this graph we have this graph that has this graph in it and we look up this graph and this graph has a list of all the graphs we have in it that are graphs and this is the graph of the graph.

getting efficiency is to have meta reasoning and meta meta reasoning to do tactical and strategic reasoning about the reasoning that's going on, another way of Getting Efficiency is to get efficiency by having a system that gets the right answer but it takes too long, you just talk to the human experts and you say hey how were you able to do this in a few seconds when it took our program 100 times and you're able solve it, so that 's one way of getting efficiency, is by having meta reasoning, and meta-meta-reasoning, to do strategic and tactical reasoning about what is going on in the system, and another way to 'get efficiency,' is to use a human expert to solve a problem, and then you just ask the human expert how they solved it, and you just say, hey, how was this able t o do this, and how long did it take our program to solve it?

Getting efficiency is to have context because often when you’re solving a problem in some context you can ignore it if you're not sure relevant information so if I ask you whether say Barack Obama is standing or sitting right now after a second or so you'll realize that you don’t know the answer to that question and you don't sort of get stuck bringing in like well, how many legs does a spider ? - getting efficiency - having context because sometimes when you solve problems in context you may not know the relevant information and you can't answer the question unless you have context - bringing information in - not knowing the answer - being able to answer a question without having to think about it - remembering the question and not having to bring in information - knowing the context and not remembering - making the question relevant and not bringing it in if it's not relevant

Summary and Next Steps:** - Explain how these things could work together. - Describe some of the uninteresting ways that they can work together - Give an example of a system that recognizes cats and when it recognizes the cat can hand a message off to a symbolic AI - Provide some examples of how these systems could interact with each other and how they could be used in a variety of ways - Demonstrate that these systems can be used to solve a range of problems - Discuss how the system can be trained to recognize cats and how it can recognize cats - Summarize the main points of the presentation - End with a question and answer period.  .. . . , : ? ! -?!-!!.!??- ? !?

We can actually generate variant English sentences for every logical assertion and we can then use that as training data for the machine learning systems and a more interesting case still not the most interesting one, a less interesting case where we can actually take the natural language generation capability that I showed you and we'll be able to actually generate variation English sentences and we will actually use that for every machine learning system that we're going to be using and I'm going to show you how to do that in a little bit more detail and then I'll show you a few examples of how we can use that to train a machine learning model and then we can show you some examples of machine learning models that we can train and then you can see some of the examples that we showed you in the last part of the talk and you can also see a couple of other examples that you can use in the next part of this talk and if you have any questions or comments, please feel free to leave them in the comments section below.

- Machine common sense is a project that's starting up in a month at DARPA called machine common sense where all the participants are machine learning companies and universities doing machine learning except for us, and we're generating this massive amount of training data for these machine learning systems, so the third and this is really the interesting and important way that the systems can work - The third way that machine learning can work is that it's generating a lot of data. It's not just generating training data, but also generating the training data and then putting it into a machine learning system that can learn from that data. So the third way in which machine learning learns from training data is by using the data that we generate to train the system. So this is the third, and the important way the system can work, is by learning from the data we generate, and then using that data to build a model that can predict the outcome of a situation.

Symbolic AI is where the machine learning system generates some hypothesis and then hands that off to the symbolic AI system to say is this consistent with everything that you know about the world and obviously if the answer is no then you shouldn't trust the result of what it just came up with but even better if a symbolic system can come up with alternate possible causal pathways causal - Symbolical AI - machine learning - artificial intelligence - natural language processing - computer vision - computational linguistics - cognitive psychology - data science - digital humanities - design - education - engineering - health care - human resources - information technology - medicine - science & technology-related - social & economic - transportation & logistics - tourism & travel - travel & tourism - public health & safety - water & sanitation - sanitation & water - waste & waste

So this is a project we did for NLM the National Library of Medicine one of the National Institutes of Health and it was again something we did with the Cleveland Clinic and some universities here and the idea is that in in the hospitals nowadays when you come in and check in to a good hospital since the cost of sequencing your DNA has decreased , you're going to be able to find out what's going on in your body and how it's interacting with your environment and how your body responds to certain stimuli and how that affects your health and how you respond to those stimuli, and so that's what we're trying to do with this project, and the project is that when you go into a hospital and you check in and you have a blood test and you've got your DNA sequenced and you know that you have an ancestor that has been a patient of yours for a long time.

DNA mutations that they have in their DNA and the medical condition that they came into the hospital with and the snips in the single nucleotide polymorphisms in that patient's DNA and you can build up a big database of correlations between medical condition and snip in the DNA of the patient that came in to the hospital and the point mutations in those patients' DNA and then you can use that data to help you find the cause of that medical condition in the patient and also help you figure out what's going on with the patient in the hospital in terms of the medical conditions that they come in with and how they're interacting with each other and how their medical condition is related to each other in the relationship that they've got with the other patients in their hospital and how that relationship is going to affect them in the long run and how it's affecting their family and their friends and so on and so forth.

Psych comes in and it has models of what polymerizes a protein molecule, a molecule that has mutations in its genome and those genome wide association studies or GWAS have gotten built up, doctors were originally very excited about this have since become very much cooler about them because a lot of what they say is just many of these A to Z correlations turn out not to actually be worth the time to explore, so what does psych do? psych comes in, and it's models of polymerization a polymer molecule molecule. So what do psychs do? They come in and they have models of the polymerized molecule and they're able to do a variety of things with it. So psych is a kind of a tool that can be used to help us understand what's going on in the human body. So that's what we're going to talk about next.

Psychiatry has access to a billion triples on linked life data about things like this and psych puts together five, ten, twenty, thirty step causal chain that would go from that single nucleotide polymorphisms to the condition like osteoporosis that brought you into the hospital so psych might put together some chain that says, oh yeah , that's a chain that goes from the sncp to the dna and from there to the bone marrow and from the bone to the brain and from here to the spinal cord and then from the brain to the heart and then finally from the heart to the kidneys and then the lungs and the intestines and the liver and the pancreas and all the way down to the endoplasmic reticulum and all of these things that we have access to in the body and we can put together five or ten or twenty or thirty or thirty step chain that will go from a SNCP to the disease and from that SNBP to the cause of the disease.

The speaker is talking about how a mutation in a gene can cause osteoporosis. The mutation is next to this gene which if it were expressed would be this protein. The protein would get to this part of the body and catalyze this reaction. Then twenty steps later that screws up bone resorption and that's why you got osteoporotic. So you shouldn't really believe those causal chain hypotheses anymore. The speaker: That mutation isn't the only one. There are many other mutations in the body that can cause a variety of health problems. So it's important to be aware of these mutations and to know how they affect your body. The next speaker is going to talk about the role of the immune system in regulating the body's immune system. So the next speaker will be talking about the immune response and how it affects the body. Finally, the speaker will talk about how the body protects itself from disease.

A to Z correlations if you can make independent predictions as you go through that process you can then go back to the data to confirm or disconfirm those predictions like in this case we were predicting that there would be more a to z correlations than you believe the correlations, but you can't even come up with one causal explanation, then you should be very distrustful of the correlation, and even more excitingly if we can make independently predicted as we go through the process, we can then make independent predictors, and then you can go back if the data confirms or disconfirms those predictions, you can also make independent predicted, and we'll show you how to do that in a second video, so that you can learn how to make independent prediction, and you'll be able to use that information to help you make better decisions in the future, and that's what I'm going to show you in the next video.

Summary and Next Steps:** - This is the most important slide I have in the whole presentation. I think it basically is the one which is communicating the way that I see this linkage happening where you generate hypotheses using machine learning, you generate possible explanations using symbolic . - I think this slide is most important because it's the one that I think is communicating how I see the linkage going where we generate hypothesises using ML and we generate explanations with symbols , symbols , and a lot of other things that we can do with ML , machine learning , symbol based models , which is a very powerful tool , because we can use it in a variety of ways and we can apply it to a wide range of applications , such as medicine , pharmacology , biology , medicine and physiology , we can also use it to help us understand the human body .

This is the difference between correlation and causation, and since you've been a good audience, I'm nearing the end of my talk so I'll give you as a treat a couple of my favorite high correlation examples that are almost certainly not real causal ones like this : - This is a high correlation example , but it's not really a causal example . - It's just a correlation example, and it doesn't really have a cause and effect relationship , so it just has a relationship between two variables , and that's all there is to it - So this is really the difference in correlation and causality , you go back to the data to confirm or disconfirm the predictions that would be inherent in those causal pathways . So this explains why we have correlation and not causality, and this is why we use high correlation as an example of high correlation .

nebulous and in some ways they're just wrong, and that's why we need statistics and symbolic reasoning to help us understand the world around us and to make sense of the world that we live in and the world we're living in, and so I guess my closing observation will be that in many ways of statistics and symbolic reasoning are just a bunch of random numbers and numbers that you can't really explain, and it's a lot of fun to try to figure out what's going on in the world and to try and figure out how to solve the problems that we have to deal with in our daily lives and in our work lives and so on, and I guess I'll just wrap up by saying that statistics and symbols are just random numbers, and they don't tell you anything about the world, they just tell you what you need to know to figure things out, and then you can use that information to solve your own problems in your own life and in your work lives.

In this segment, we're going to talk about the evolution of red hair. We'll also talk about different evolutionary stages, competing ideologies, and how we understand why that's true and why it should be exactly one red hair gene. So let's start with a little bit of background on red hair and then we'll talk about some of the different types of genes that are involved in red hair, and then let me give you an example of a red hair type. Red hair is a type of gene. It's a recessive gene, and it's one of the genes that is responsible for the red hair color. So if a couple who doesn't have red hair has any children that had any red hair about one quarter of their children had red hair , it means that about one-fourth of the children in that couple had redhair. So that means that around one-fifth of that couple's children have redhair, and that means there are about a hundred thousand years of people who have noticed that if you don't get red hair in your family, you're not going to get it in your children.

be able to use perspective to build a bridge, but it's not as easy as you might think, because you have to know how to do it, and it takes a lot of time and effort to get it right, and you're going to have to learn how to use it to build the bridge, and that's why you'll need to understand the principles behind perspective, and then you can use that knowledge to build bridges, and so on, in seven hundred years ago we had Giotto painting pictures with perspective, but not perfectly because he didn't really understand what he was doing, he could only impart it to apprentices through months and years of study, but a hundred years later thanks to Brunelleschi and so forth we understood the principles of perspective bridge building is another case where you might ... you might be interested in learning more about perspective, or you might want to learn more about building bridges.

The bridge building is well understood but even less than a hundred years ago horrible accidents like like this took place and even last year just outside of Miami there was this bridge collapse that killed several people and so on or another example is going all the way back you know it's good that Copernicus didn't have 1960 or beyond computing technology or he would never have astronomy or cosmology or any of the other things that we talked about in the first part of the lesson. So that's it for today's lesson. Let's move on to the next part of this lesson where we're going to talk about Copernican's theory of the universe. So let's go back to the beginning of time and we'll talk about how the universe was formed and how it got its shape and how the sun and the moon got their shape. And then we will talk about the revolution of the Earth and how that revolution changed the course of the history of the world.

heliocentric model of the solar system because you could just calculate at the cycles well enough that would agree with all telescopic observations or when this phenomenon happened where like about 70% of people see this as blue and black, I'm one of the , the blue and , black , people who see this phenomenon as white and gold hands, okay, so about 70 percent of people, you know, about 70%, of you people, see this, you see it as blue , and black hands, right, so that's a , 70 percent, of the people that see this. Okay, so let's move on to the next topic. Let's go back to the first topic, which is the solar cycle, and we're going to talk about the cycles of the sun, and then we'll go to the second topic, the solar wind, and the third topic is, how do we know that the sun rotates on its axis, and how do you know that it's moving in the same direction as the sun?

if you think of causality and statistics as sort of like this infinite series of elephants and turtles and I I promised you there would be fireworks it's a little bit of fireworks at the end and so on but you can think of it like this: the elephants eat the turtles, and the tiger eats the turtle, and then the lion ate the elephant, and finally the giraffe ate a lion, and that's the end of the story, but the elephant ate all of the tigers and lions and then there's this one elephant and he's going to eat all the other elephants, because he ate them all, but he didn't eat any of them, so he just ate some of them and then he went to the zoo, and there he was, and it was a very interesting story, because it was the first time he had ever seen a white and gold elephant.

- I hope that you got out of it the things that I promised that you would get out of, and that you'll think when you're building a eyes in the future of not just using machine learning but actually building and using a eye that have both halves of their brains functioning. Thank you. - Okay, thank you for joining us today. We'll be back in a few minutes with a recap of what we talked about today. In the meantime, here's a question for you: What would you like to see in the eyes of the future? - What do you think would be the most important feature of the eyes that we're going to be able to build? – What are some of the biggest challenges that we are going to have to face in the next few years, and how can we overcome these challenges? — And what are some ways that we can help you solve these problems?