There are two possible power sources that can drive an artificial intelligence. They really come from different places, one effectively from statistics and one from logic. Each of them have pluses and minuses. They each have strengths and weaknesses. And you don't have to choose between them. There are tens of millions of rules of common sense reasoning that we typically have formed by about the time we reach age three or four. If it weren't cost effective, evolution would have atrophied our left brain hemispheres a long time ago. Both the left and right brain programs have not really intelligence, but the thin veneer of intelligence. The system didn't understand things like automobiles can't get human diseases and so on. Even if you look at the best chat bots today, you'll see that they have that kind of ELISA-like garbling. The power of statistical machine learning is the power of more being more. The effort to start up a machine learning solution is fairly low. You can grab one of the existing algorithms off the shelf, and a day or two later you can be up and running and get useful, actionable results. Psychology is able to give you the step-by-step reasoning. All this English is generated in real time as we're sitting here by the system. So all of this is represented in logic, which takes about usually about one and a half or twice as many words as it were to say as it said in English. Psychologists use the system to model people and come up with customized suggestions for what they might want to do in Austin, Texas for South by Southwest. In this case, for instance, the suggestion is there are about ten suggestions and one of which is Hamilton Pool and Hamilton Pool is like number nine on the top ten list and it's not dog friendly. Psych can tell you why you're likely to slip and fall. There's an 80 to 100% chance of rain in 24 hours right before you're going to be visiting it. There isn't big data available. Another case is where there are two or more faults going on at once. Psych Power's Mathcraft program helps sixth graders and fifth graders do math, learning math. In this case, very simple linear equation and they have to solve it, a sixth grade problem. They get this horrible answer instead of the correct answer which is four. In Mathcraft the roles are reversed and in fact your job is not to solve math problems, it's to watch this cute little avatar struggling to survive in a crashed spaceship as he or she solves math problems. If you give them good advice about the problems then they're able to solve the problems in their environment. The government could benefit by partnering with symbolic logic based AI if the things we've talked about already there's little or no data. This is one of the major ways in which the government is able to avoid confirmation bias and think out of the box and cover more future possibilities. Multiple experts would have their own opinions on a problem. It's not like you want to listen to any one of them to make the most informed decision you really want to hear all of them arguing with each other and then make your own decision. In many cases the person who's best at some task is much much much better than the average person at that task. Psych was able to recognize fragments almost like fill in the blank mad lib fragments. The doctor then selects which of those fragments were part of their intended question. Psych brings to bear medical knowledge discourse knowledge common sense knowledge and often the number of ways that those fragments can be combined into a meaningful question. Both of these technologies have been around for depending on how you count 40 or 45 or maybe even 50 years and haven't really changed that much in the last decades. There were neural net based statistical based machine learning systems available in the 1960s and throughout the 1970s. "We've got about 42,000, 43,000 different relations or functions or predicates that connect those different terms and about a million and a half general terms not proper nouns but general terms like table and furniture and so on" "We do have this technology that can actually be applied which is pretty exciting" In the Cleveland Clinic application the amount of things we had to tell the system was down around the 100,000, 120,000 levels of things. It actually used many millions of things that were in its knowledge base and in fact if you ask a particular question like this and actually see what pieces of knowledge are used in the arguments ultimately something like 95% of what it's actually using to answer your questions were things that it had known years before the application was even started. Psych is able to very quickly find the connections even though the way it does it is completely different from the way machine learning would try to process the image. Psych doesn't actually look at the image so imagine that the image is bad quality. It's because you have pieces of knowledge about the world like when you're happy you smile. Psych is trying to build that semantic glue that will make those pieces fit together that will relieve one of the limitations of symbolic AIs. The main weakness that logic has is that the pieces the rules have to fit together and without the general common sense background the rules don't generally fit together very well. A typical limited logic program today. this where you have seven things that you're given and then you have to prove three different statements. Most of the symbolic logic AIs make this assumption that if you try to prove something and you fail that means that the thing you were trying to prove is false. What about dealing with things that are only default true like birds can fly except penguins or birds canFly but with an exception of a bird over here that has a broken wing or something like that. How do you deal with the fact that you might believe something but you'll learn something tomorrow that causes you to want to change your belief. Theory provers are notoriously slow so unlike machine learning systems if you're not careful the logic half of the brain will be extremely slow. Each representation lets you express more complicated things but is less efficient for the machines to reason with so natural languages are extremely expressive that's why we talk in in languages. In the last 35 years our focus has been finding ways to speed up first order logic. We have 1100 reasoning engines 1100 different inference engines that are all working on every problem and every sub problem and they raise their hand when they can make some progress and so as a community of agents they work together to tackle problems. The set of agents is growing and together they're able to efficiently solve it and if we reach an application where the system gets the right answer but it takes too long you just talk to the human experts and you say hey how were you able to do this in a few seconds when it took our program 100 times to solve it. Another way of getting efficiency is to have meta reasoning and meta meta reasoning to do tactical and strategic reasoning about the reasoning going on. We're generating this massive amount of training data for these machine learning systems so the third and this is really the interesting and important way that the systems can work together is where the machine learning system generates some hypothesis and then hands that off to the symbolic AI system to say is this consistent with everything that you know about the world. If the answer is no then you shouldn't trust the result. We have access to a billion triples on linked life data about things like this and psych puts together five, ten, twenty, thirty step causal chain that would go from that single nucleotide polymorphisms to the condition like osteoporosis that brought you into the hospital. If you can't even come up with one causal explanation then you should be very distrustful of the A to Z correlation. In some ways of statistics and symbolic reasoning are just different evolutionary stages not really so much competing ideologies. between the divorce rate in Maine and the amount of margarine that was eaten and this is my favorite one because secretly we secretly we'd like there to be a causal connection here where you know as people used Internet Explorer less and less the murder rate has gone down. I hope that you got out of it the things that I promised that you would get out of. it and that you'll think when you're building a eyes in the future of not just using machine learning but actually building and using a eyes that have both halves of their brains functioning thank you. There are two possible power sources that can drive an artificial intelligence. They really come from different places, one effectively from statistics and one from logic. Each of them have pluses and minuses. They each have strengths and weaknesses. And you don't have to choose between them. There are tens of millions of rules of common sense reasoning that we typically have formed by about the time we reach age three or four. If it weren't cost effective, evolution would have atrophied our left brain hemispheres a long time ago. Both the left and right brain programs have not really intelligence, but the thin veneer of intelligence. The system didn't understand things like automobiles can't get human diseases and so on. Even if you look at the best chat bots today, you'll see that they have that kind of ELISA-like garbling. The power of statistical machine learning is the power of more being more. The effort to start up a machine learning solution is fairly low. You can grab one of the existing algorithms off the shelf, and a day or two later you can be up and running and get useful, actionable results. Psychology is able to give you the step-by-step reasoning. All this English is generated in real time as we're sitting here by the system. So all of this is represented in logic, which takes about usually about one and a half or twice as many words as it were to say as it said in English. Psychologists use the system to model people and come up with customized suggestions for what they might want to do in Austin, Texas for South by Southwest. In this case, for instance, there are about ten suggestions and one of which is Hamilton Pool and Hamilton Pool is like number nine on the top ten list and it has a couple Psych can tell you why you're likely to slip and fall. There's an 80 to 100% chance of rain in 24 hours right before you're going to be visiting it. There isn't big data available. Another case is where there are two or more faults going on at once. Psych Power's Mathcraft program helps sixth graders and fifth graders do math, learning math. In this case, very simple linear equation and they have to solve it, a sixth grade problem. They get this horrible answer instead of the correct answer which is four. In Mathcraft the roles are reversed and in fact your job is not to solve math problems, it's to watch this cute little avatar struggling to survive in a crashed spaceship as he or she solves math problems. If you give them good advice about the problems then they're able to solve the problems in their environment. The government could benefit by partnering with symbolic logic based AI if the things we've talked about already there's little or no data. This is one of the major ways in which the government is able to avoid confirmation bias and think out of the box and cover more future possibilities. Multiple experts would have their own opinions on a problem. It's not like you want to listen to any one of them to make the most informed decision. You really want to hear all of them arguing with each other and then make your own decision. In many cases the person who's best at some task is much much much better than Psych was able to recognize fragments almost like fill in the blank mad lib fragments. The doctor then selects which of those fragments were part of their intended question. Psych brings to bear medical knowledge discourse knowledge common sense knowledge and often the number of ways that those fragments can be combined into a meaningful question. Both of these technologies have been around for depending on how you count 40 or 45 or maybe even 50 years and haven't really changed that much in the last decades. There were neural net based statistical based machine learning systems available in the 1960s and throughout the 1970s. "We've built in those decades is this large collection of this large ontology of rules of thumb like ownership transfers through physical parts and causes proceed effects and if some device isn't working try turning it off and on again and things like that" "We've got about 42,000, 43,000 different relations or functions or pred In the Cleveland Clinic application the amount of things we had to tell the system was down around the 100,000, 120,000 levels of things. It actually used many millions of things that were in its knowledge base. And speaking of common sense almost any application where humans bring common sense to bear is one where left brain thinking is relevant Psych is able to very quickly find the connections even though the way it does it is completely different from the way machine learning would try to process the image. Psych doesn't actually look at the image so imagine that the image is bad quality. It's because you have pieces of knowledge about the world like when you're happy you smile. Psych is trying to build that semantic glue that will make those pieces fit together that will relieve one of the limitations of symbolic AIs. The main weakness that logic has is that the pieces the rules have to fit together and without the general common sense background the rules don't generally fit together very well. A typical limited logic program today. this where you have seven things that you're given and then you have to prove three different statements. Most of the symbolic logic AIs make this assumption that if you try to prove something and you fail that means that the thing you were trying to prove is false. What about dealing with things that Theory provers are notoriously slow so unlike machine learning systems if you're not careful the logic half of the brain will be extremely slow. Each representation lets you express more complicated things but is less efficient for the machines to reason with so natural languages are extremely expressive that's why we talk in in languages. In the last 35 years our focus has been finding ways to speed up first order logic. We have 1100 reasoning engines 1100 different inference engines that are all working on every problem and every sub problem and they raise their hand when they can make some progress and so as a community of agents they work together to tackle problems. The set of agents is growing and together they're able to efficiently solve it and if we reach an application where the system gets the right answer but it takes too long you just talk to the human experts and you say hey how were you able to do this in a few seconds when it took our program 100 times and you're We're generating this massive amount of training data for these machine learning systems so the third and this is really the interesting and important way that the systems can work together is where the machine learning system generates some hypothesis and then hands that off to the symbolic AI system to say is this consistent with everything that you know about the world. Psych comes We have access to a billion triples on linked life data about things like this and psych puts together five, ten, twenty, thirty step causal chain that would go from that single nucleotide polymorphisms to the condition like osteoporosis. You shouldn't really believe those causal chain hypotheses anymore than you believe the A to Z correlations In some ways statistics and symbolic reasoning are just different evolutionary stages not really so much competing ideologies. between the divorce rate in Maine and the amount of margarine that was eaten and this is my favorite one because secretly we secretly we'd like there to be a causal connection here where you know as people used Internet Explorer less and less the murder I hope that you got out of it the things that I promised that you would get out of. it and that you'll think when you're building a eyes in the future of not just using machine learning but actually building and using a eyes that have both halves of their brains functioning thank you.